---
title: 'Reactive Encapsulation: Reusable Components in React'
publishedAt: '2017-08-27'
summary: ''
---

I've been using React for about a year now, and even though its approach of
writing a user interface as a set of components is not particularly unique when
compared other libraries and frameworks, React shines in how its components can
be constructed from both HTML and Javascript. While other libraries tightly
maintain the long held notion of separating markup from interactivity, React
chose instead to collapse the two by means of its JSX extension, recognising
that it makes more sense to draw lines around business-logical considerations
rather than theoretical concerns.

Writing code that's more modular is not a new exercise for the web, and we've
gone through our fair share of iterating through what it means to write code
that follows basic principles like encapsulation and DRY. The problem with
writing code, however, is that often times we want the best of both worlds:
components should be consistent yet remain customisable; they should follow a
design guide, except for my one special use case; they should largely do the
same thing, except when lighting strikes during a full moon on the winter
equinox.

Now, this is not really a new problem in programming, and many languages and
frameworks have solved this with tools such as interfaces and traits, reusable
behaviours and dependency injection. The underlying principle behind all of
these solutions is that it's far easier to create small, generic things, and
compose them together via some contract, than to make an omnipotent God object.

In Javascript, we often struggle to balance competing the needs of reusability
and modularity, and it hasn't been particularly easy. The fundamental problem
with thinking about reusable components, is that we think about reusable
components:


To be fair, thinking about isolation is a difficult thing to do since it's often
difficult to decompose an interactive widget down into all its component parts.
The parts of it that affect how it looks and those parts that affect how it
behaves could either be completely isolated or very tightly coupled, and there's
no real science behind where to draw the line. After all, Earth is a pretty well
encapsulated planet.

We've been told that thinking about modularity in React is easy, and it is: if a
component becomes to big, just break it up into smaller parts and `.map()` over
some normalised data structure for reuse and profit. But what if you have
components that are intentionally generic and should be reusable across multiple
apps, all with varying use cases and business needs? It always seems to boil
down to one of two things:

Config soup: Every use case adds a config specific for its use case with a
backwards-compatible default. Soon, you have 14 configuration options for a
single component, some of which only apply if you have that one boolean set to
true, or if another config is not set. Copy pasta: My use case is different
enough from your use case that it justifies me copying and pasting your
implementation and changing it to fit my needs. If there are code-external
demands for consistency across both components (usually around design and
accessibility), somebody (who?) will have to know to update both places (how?).
Soon, you'll have 5 modals and 7 carousels. The modus operandi of web
components, is that we should stop trying to extend things with features, but
compose them from smaller, isolated parts. This is not something that relative
newcomers to React are exposed to, but it does in fact allow us to do that in a
number of ways. Let's walk though some of these strategies to make our
components more reusable.

Strategy 1: Inversion of Control While it's always easier to see everything come
together as a whole before breaking it up into smaller component parts, changing
the way you think about component design can help make your components flexible
out of the box.

Instead of having a single component render any number of subcomponents, we can
think of subcomponents as dependencies to be injected into the subject
component. This way, the main responsibility of a parent component is to wire up
the interactions between its subcomponents rather than decide what those
subcomponents actually look like. When coupled with the `defaultProps` static
property, inverting the dependencies of a component becomes very easy:

```js
function OldModalFooter() {
  return <div>
    <button className='button button--tertiary'>
      Cancel
    </button>
    <button className='button button--secondary'>
      Previous
    </button>
    <button className='button button--primary'>
      Next
    </button>
  </div>;
}

// Pass in depedencies instead of instantiating them.
// Now this modal footer becomes immediately more generic
function NewModalFooter(props) {
  return <div className='modal__footer'>
    { props.tertiaryButton }
    { props.secondaryButton }
    { props.primaryButton }
  </div>;
}

NewModalFooter.defaultProps = {
  tertiaryButton = 
    <button className='button button--tertiary'>
      Cancel
    </button>,
  secondaryButton = 
    <button className='button button--secondary'>
      Previous
    </button>,
  primaryButton = 
    <button className='button button--primary'>
      Next
    </button>
};

function MyModal(props) {
  var isValid = validate(props);
  return <div>
    { props.content }
    <NewModalFooter primaryButton={ 
        <button disabled={ !isValid } onClick={ props.submit }>Submit</button>
    } />
  </div>;
}
```
Designing components this way also forces you to think about the API of your
component: What is the sole purpose of this component and what does it need in
order to be able to perform that purpose? What can it leave up to consuming
components and what does it want to enforce? Could we, for example, even pass in
`<NewModalFooter />` into `<MyModal />`?

Strategy 2: Hax0rzing the virtual DOM tree with React.cloneElement() But first,
terminology. We know that React works by maintaining virtual DOMs in memory,
diffing them against each other in order to figure out what needs re-rendering
in the browser's DOM. But how do the React components we write actually become
instantiated into DOM nodes?

Components: What we usually refer to as Components are actually component
definitions (as opposed to component instances). When you do
`React.createClass()` or write a pure functional component in JSX, what you're
writing is a declaration for what a Component should do and look like (hence you
are creating a class). To render a component, you'd write `<MyComponent />`
Elements: The JSX compiler than transforms any of these Components (even the
native browser "components" such as `<div>`s and `<a>`s and `<span>`s) into
React Elements by transpiling `<MyComponent />` into a
`React.createElement(MyComponent)` method call. React Elements are
specifications for how to render a specific node in the virtual DOM tree.
Elements have a type field, which is either a string representing the native DOM
element 'div', 'a', 'span', or the actual Component class returned from a
`React.createClass()` call. Together with a props map, an Element serves as a
specification for how a specific instance of a component will be rendered in a
specific place in the tree. To render an Element, you write ` { myElement }` At
no point do we actually instantiate any React Elements ourselves. All we are
writing in our JSX files are specifications for what the DOM tree will actually
look like. We pass this specification to React, who will then internally
instantiate actual Javascript objects representing a node in the virtual DOM
tree. When state changes and React re-renders, the same specification is used
(albeit with different prop values) to create a new virtual DOM for diffing
against the previous one.

Enter React.cloneElement() What this means is that we can intercept the vDOM
tree prior to it being passed to React by changing the tree's specification.
Despite its name, `React.cloneElement()` doesn't have the performance baggage of
a lot of other types of cloning since you're merely cloning the specification
for the Element at that point (which is a much smaller object than a DOM node or
even a virtual DOM tree node). `cloneElement()` shallow-merges any props that
you want to enforce on this node, allowing you to change or augment existing
specifications:
```js
function EvenNewerModalFooter(props) {
  return <div className='modal__footer'>
    { props.tertiaryButton && props.tertiaryButton }
    { props.secondaryButton && props.secondaryButton }
    { props.primaryButton && 
      React.cloneElement(
        props.primaryButton,
        {
          className: props.enforcedPrimaryButtonClassName + ' ' + props.primaryButton.props.className,
          onClick: function() {
             trackClick('tracking happened before intended action');
             props.primaryButton.props.onClick(...arguments);
          }
        },
        <span className='text--capitalize'>
           { props.children }
        </span>
      )  
    }
  </div>;
}

EvenNewerModalFooter.defaultProps = {
    enforcedPrimaryButtonClassName = 'button button__primary'
}
```
Much like Strategy 1, you don't always have to use cloneElement to allow for
maximum flexibility: when to enforce props and when to make them overridable in
a reusable component is more of an art than a science. In this case, we probably
didn't really need to make `enforcedPrimaryButtonClassName` a default prop in
order for it to be overridable (which defeats the point of it being enforced).
But it serves as a good example of how we might use `defaultProps` and
`cloneElement` to minimise the surface area of our component, and keep it
customisable for those who need it to be.

Strategy 3: Higher Order Components The last strategy for sharing common
behaviour is by dynamically extending a Component class's functionality at run
time with a Higher Order Component (HOC). There's nothing specifically React
about HOCs since all they are are Component factories: an HOC is a function that
takes in a Component class as a parameter, and returns a new Component class
that does something over and above the wrapped Component. It's particularly
useful for augmenting Components with lifecycle-related functionality, or
precomposing sets of props for passing into the wrapped Component.

In this example, I create an HOC that wraps a Component with a `<div>` to
provide closing animations. Typically when you use the `{ isShowing &&
<MyComponent> }` construction, it's easy to add on-render animations, but
difficult to add animations around unmounting. Once `isShowing` is false, React
blows away MyComponent altogether, which means that the MyComponent class has no
opportunity to handle its own unmount animation:
```js
function withAnimateClose(SomeModalClass, closingAnimationClassName) {
  return class extends React.Component {
    constructor(props) {
      this.state = {
        isClosing: false
      };
    }
    startAnimatingClose() {
        this.setState({ isClosing: true });
    }
    render() {
      return <SomeModalClass className={ this.props.className + (this.state.isClosing ? ' ' + closingAnimationClassName : '') } 
                             onClose={ this.startAnimatingClose }
                             onAnimationEnd={ function(evt) {
                               if (evt.target === evt.currentTarget && evt.animationName === closingAnimationClassName) { 
                                 this.props.onClose(); // e.g. a redux action that sets the boolean value to decide whether to render the wrapped component or not
                               }
                             }.bind(this) }
                             {...this.props} />;
    }
  };
}

const ClosingModal = withAnimatedClose(Modal, 'fade-out');
// `withAnimatedClose` is really just a pure-function Component factory
// and we can (should!) easily reuse it with other components:
// ﻿const ClosingPopup = withAnimatedClose(Popup, 'slide-down')﻿

function App(props) {
  return props.shouldShowModal && <ClosingModal onClose={ function() {
    props.setShouldShowModal(false);
  } } />;
}
```
You'll notice, in particular, that I'm clobbering the `onClose` prop that
`<SomeModalClass>` originally expects, with `startAnimatingClose`. To the
internal implementation of `<SomeModalClass` it's completely transparent whether
or not the class was wrapped in an HOC or not.

It's important to recognise the differences between using `cloneElement()` and
Higher Order Components: the former acts on Elements while the latter acts on
Component classes. One could certainly wrap or clobber props in both, but HOCs
provides an entry point into the component lifecycle that `cloneElement()` does
not. HOCs can thus have and manage their own state with regard to how that
lifecycle interacts with the wrapped component's lifecycle. `cloneElement()` on
the other hand, is a lighter touch, allowing you to mutate the props of any
element (without needing to know its class type) at runtime.

I hope you'll find these strategies useful in thinking about how to build
reusable functionality. Ultimately, recall that reusability is more about
composability and encapsulation: if you can decompose something into smaller
parts, you can write it in a reusable manner. A good side benefit is that future
engineers (including yourself) who come upon this codebase will thank you when
they need it to be ever so special.

This article is a condensation of a presentation I gave to engineers working on
React while doing product development at Etsy. Obviously none of these are my
ideas, but arose out of my frustration at trying to write plug-and-play
components. Leave a comment if you have thoughts around writing reusable
components!

Further reading (in suggested order):

https://facebook.github.io/react/tutorial/tutorial.html#what-is-react
https://facebook.github.io/react/docs/rendering-elements.html
https://facebook.github.io/react/docs/reconciliation.html
https://medium.com/@dan_abramov/react-components-elements-and-instances-90800811f8ca
https://facebook.github.io/react/docs/react-api.html#cloneelement
https://facebook.github.io/react/docs/higher-order-components.html
https://medium.com/@franleplant/react-higher-order-components-in-depth-cf9032ee6c3e

https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/reactive-encapsulation-reusable-components-react-joel-kang/?trackingId=VX2IMv%2FKRvG043NmWmnJCw%3D%3D