---
title: 'Why I'm excited about Glimmer2 and why you already know how it's better'
publishedAt: '2016-03-31'
summary: ''
---

**Update**: Over the weekend this series of tweets went into slightly more
detail about this (and potentially things to come)

At EmberConf2016, Ember.js core team members Godfrey Chan and Yehuda Katz
unveiled some aspects of the new Glimmer2 engine that will power Ember template
rendering:

The talk itself contained some amount of magical hand waving (or what we
technically refer to in the industry as "abstractions"), but it fundamentally
introduced to us the design decisions that would allow Glimmer to (allegedly)
achieve 60fps rendering.

Template Optimisations Part of the magic lies in the second half of the speaker
deck, which describes how:

templates are pre-compiled at build-time to a much leaner wire format for
smaller asset bundles. The wire format is then lazily parsed and evaluated
during run-time (JIT-compiled) into a highly optimised opcode. The opcode is
then rendered in a custom VM into memoized operations that output regular DOM
nodes. Essentially, Godfrey and Yehuda have highly optimised every single step
in the conversion of some `{{mustache}}` into their corresponding DOM nodes. This
is all very cool since there's nothing that app developers need to actually do
to gain the benefits from all of these optimisations. It should, according to
them, Just Work (tm).

The problem they thus set out to solve is to bridge the gap between the
functionally-reactive template concept, and the functional but non-reactive
Javascript data ecosystem. Data Down? More interestingly, they started by
confusing us laying out the conceptual framework that templates are essentially
pure functions for transforming some input data into some output HTML. The
problem, however, is that Javascript has never been truly functional the way
that the Lisp languages have been.

Being able to create vars in order to store intermediate outputs of a function
allows us to procedurally decide how to chain / stream functions together, when
to pause these streams (by storing the intermediate outputs into variables) and
then, at some point in the future, resume said streams. These intermediate
states, however, can meanwhile be modified by other (occasionally external)
functions that often result in the spooky action at a distance class of bugs.
Every time you modify data using the this pointer, you're leaving the realm of
the purely functional.

The problem they thus set out to solve is to bridge the gap between the
functionally-reactive template concept, and the functional but non-reactive
Javascript data ecosystem.

Abstract References To do this, they introduce the concept of the Reference,
which is essentially an object that wraps a primitive value with a getter;
instead of accessing a piece of data directly, Glimmer2 accesses references to
such data. This sounds more complicated than it really is; in fact, if you're a
javascript developer, you already know how what references are: we just call
them "variables".

When you write var foo = bar + bat, you're creating an expression that sums the
values of the references (variables) "bar" and "bat" In order to know what to
store into foo, we have to know the values of bar and bat at the time this
expression is evaluated.

What Glimmer2 does is take this abstraction one level higher: instead of
consuming javascript primitives as data, the template operations only deal with
References, deferring the evaluation of their values till later: fooReference =
barReference + batReference.

 ... if you're a javascript developer, you already know how what references are:
we just call them "variables" Lazy Evaluation Because we're just passing around
these references, we don't actually need to calculate their values until
absolutely necessary. If these calculations are very computation heavy, then
we're delaying those computations until the point right before that portion of
the template will be rendered: barReference and batReference only need to be
evaluated if fooReference is evaluated. If the template accesses either
barReference or batReference in a conditional, then only one of those two
references will actually be evaluated.

Pulling values instead of Pushing them A key factor in this design, is that it
allows us to convert the entire data-down part of DDAU to use a pull system
rather than a push one.

You're already familiar with the push model because that's how the DOM Event
model works: when you want to handle a click event, you subscribe to it using
addEventListener so that when a user clicks your button, the Event object gets
pushed into your handler, and then pushed up the DOM tree (propagated) until the
root element.

You're also familiar with this because that's how Computed Properties work
today: when you defined foo to be a computed property of bar and bat, you're
essentially saying "on bar change, also change foo" and "on bat change, also
change foo". 

With reference compositions, Glimmer2 actually inverts this logic: "on get foo,
also get the the values of bar and bat (but only if necessary)".

Validations and Dirty Checking Now, you may be thinking: wait, what if only bar
changes but not bat? That's where the brilliance of Validators comes in.
Essentially, validators augment references with a validation method that allows
the engine to either return a previously calculated value if it is not dirty, or
redo the calculation again. And recall, all of this is moot if fooReference no
longer needs to be computed.

How they do this is basically by maintaining a local and global lastModified
stamp, and comparing the stamps during validation to determine if they are the
same. If they are, the value obtained is not dirty and we can short-circuit the
calculation. There's a little bit of magical hand-waving going on here too, but
it's not that important that we know the internals of how validation is done.

What is important, however, is that because Glimmer2 defines such a validation
interface and consistently applies it across all references, the benefit of not
needing to evaluate more computationally complex references quickly outweighs
the performance overhead of doing the validation.

With reference compositions, Glimmer2 actually inverts this logic: "on get foo,
also get the the values of bar and bat (but only if necessary)" So What? The
ecosystem of Javascript today is filled with push-based event-driven models.
I've always found this to be massively disconcerting because when any subscriber
can subscribe to any publisher, the state of the world is highly dependent on
what publishers do. Yet ironically, publishers have no idea what happens to the
rest of the system when they do publish an event.

Supporters of pub/sub systems highlight the decoupling of subscribers and
publishers as a key benefit; but I argue that these systems are not removing the
concerns of dependency, they're just moving it into the untraceable, ethereal
space of the pub/sub channel. And when subscribers also become publishers, we
quickly devolve into the circular hell we know today as two-way data binding.

This pull based system that Godfrey and Yehuda are building makes a lot more
sense since there's always a clear unidirectional data flow that stems not from
the origin of a push request (which can come from anywhere), but from the
outcome of a pull request (which is always known since the thing making the
request is the outcome). If you work with broccoli, that's essentially how
broccoli walks through your trees: it starts at the end and walks backwards so
it know where to stop when dependent values haven't changed.

Glimmer2 is exciting not because it makes our view layer insanely faster. It's
exciting because it fundamentally changes the way we think about how data flows
through our templates, and does so using the deceptively simple concept of the
validated reference. 

Endless possibilities At the start of this article, I highlighted the second
half of their presentation first, in part because it seemed easier to
understand, especially when sold as just a bunch of optimisations. It's no
mistake, however, the order in which Godfrey and Yehuda laid out their
presentation.

Taking both halves in concert, we can start to understand how this deceptively
simple system is immensely powerful. By converting handlebars templates into
minutely efficient and ordered operations for DOM creation that depend on an
output-driven pull-based data flow, Glimmer2 is able to determine which part of
the rendered HTML maps to which opcode and thusly which (part of which)
template.

What they've essentially done, then, is to create a dynamic system for reverse
engineering: given a particular DOM structure (output), and a input dataset, the
engine can recreate the state of each component and template in your app.
Fastboot and Glimmer2 then work in concert to render our app server side,
transmit it over the wire, and recreate the app state from the rendered HTML,
paving the way for us to achieve true universality in our Javascript
applications.

https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/why-im-excited-glimmer2-you-already-know-its-better-joel-kang/?trackingId=VX2IMv%2FKRvG043NmWmnJCw%3D%3D