---
title: In Defence of the Front End
publishedAt: '2015-11-20'
summary: Front-end may be accessible, but does it necessarily make it simple?
original: https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/defence-front-end-joel-kang
---
Fresh out of college and armed with my very practical degree in Cognitive
Science, I started here at LinkedIn completely convinced that I had found a
loophole in the interview process. I was pretty sure I screwed up most of my
interview, and that I must have been hired due to my winsome personality and
extensive experience in acquiring skill endorsements.

Up to that point, every piece of Javascript I had written pretty much existed in
single files that were hundreds, if not thousands, of lines long. My most recent
foray into the backend then required me to modify a Django MVC app even though
the only server code I had written was in PHP, and I had no idea what MVC meant. 

While working on the Who's Viewed My Profile page that you see today, my
Confucian upbringing coupled with the talent of our Engineering counterparts
never failed to remind me that all of these (capital 'E') Engineers could easily
do my job. Finding a Javascript code review in my inbox heralded my impending
irrelevance, relegating me to take solace in knowing that no self respecting
Engineer would spend days pouring over `<table>` tags in order to make an email
render properly.

As the Web Development team at LinkedIn grew bigger, the types of scaling
problems that nobody ever talks about started to emerge: one carousel
implementation was not enough to cover another's use case and bam we had 15
*extensible* and !reusable! sliders across the site.

During this time of growth, I started to jump on the hotness bandwagon(TM) whose
lingua franca makes any developer without a Computer Science degree think we
were speaking Latin. Suddenly we were decorating our widgets instead of
extending them; but really they should be modules that had mixins on top of
their prototypes wrapped in an iife so that any leaky abstractions wouldn't
pollute the global namespace. Before I knew it, I was writing Asynchronous
Module Declarations for my Model-View-Controller Single-Page Application that
was bundled with Require and served with Almond.

Wat.

When I started picking up Java/Scala out of necessity, its strongly-typed nature
lent itself a very gentle learning curve. I didn't necessarily have to
understand how anything worked (and, to be fair, I didn't), but I could follow
what everyone else was doing and clone the structure for my own use case. Any
mistake caused by ignorance, stupidity or lack of caffeine had a red squiggly
line imploring me to fix it. If there was a better way of structuring a code
block, IntelliJ would gently nudge me in that direction.

Now, if you've been following closely to the anecdotes I have misled you with,
this article is really about why Front-End development is actually harder than
all the other ends (listicle alert).

## 1. Everything is Everything, Everywhere
In Java projects, any classes or methods that share the same name can be easily
resolved by importing the packages that specify them; IntelliJ will even suggest
possible dependencies from which to import. Even then, you can only use that
specific method assuming your arguments and return type match the function's
signature. The code and IDE literally prevent you from making syntactic errors.

Javascript globals are everywhere; you're free to set window.MyGlobal to be any
thing; and because objects are set by reference and not by value, dependency
injection takes on a whole new meaning when someone else is, erm, injecting into
your dependency. There are some fundamental syntax rules, but as long as your
braces are matching, there's nothing stopping you from summing an object with an
array (see Wat. above).

Since type is basically meaningless in Javascript, you may expect MyGlobal to be
an object with someMethod, but another library could set window.MyGlobal to be a
String, resulting in MyGlobal.someMethod being undefined. And recall: 

```js
null == undefined !== null.
```

## 2. Everything is Somewhere
In front-end development, the browser (or native mobile OS) is your Virtual
Machine, and with the variety of vendors and clients out there, low-level APIs
are supported at varying degrees of fidelity. That means a lot of:

```js
if (api.method !== undefined) {
  api.method();
} else {
  /* my own implementation which is probably subpar and slower */
}
```

instead of actually, you know, writing business logic.

Just to get Javascript onto the page, the Front-End Developer needs to carefully
curate her `<script>` tags, making sure that a) script load order is not important
for execution, and b) that loading doesn't synchronously block the rendering of
the page, both topics in their own regard.

Lest not we forget that web development also requires both HTML and CSS, each
with its own compatibility issues across browsers. More importantly, their
purely declarative natures insist upon a deep understanding of what magic they
hide under the hood.

## 3. Everything is Nowhere
Now, all of this actually only happens once some data arrives in the browser
(typically, the "base page"). This initial request is the first time your
proprietary data and code leaves your data centres and servers, making contact
with an ISP that you don't have control over. 

During this transport, any number of things can happen, and any one of your
scripts may fail. Because Javascript in the browser is single-threaded, any call
to a method that hasn't been defined will throw an exception that will likely
bubble to the browser and kill that thread. Suddenly all your JS-enabled
functionality simply won't work, and your users will be frustrated that your
button appears clickable but doesn't do anything.

Assuming all of this miraculously succeeds, you must now recall that unlike a
database, the user's session has little to no state. It doesn't know what
happened in your server, and its recollection of previous sessions is minimal
and volatile. Every element has to be re-rendered the same (hopefully
deterministic) way, and every JSON response representing a data model has to be
painstakingly reconstructed. Once all of that has completed, you've only started
your app. Then, between the creativity of your users and the reliability of
their internet service, one user session is essentially a unique series of code
execution paths that has never occurred before:

## 4. Everything is Everything
Ultimately, we can philosophise and debate the theoretical underpinnings of our
code, but the user sees one interface, and expects to experience that UI as a
means to some end. Every line of code should exist to help the user navigate
through this experience as seamlessly, delightfully and easily as possible. 

Animations come top of mind when we talk about user experience, but so is data
caching for perceptions of speed. Consistency of widgets allows for certain
affordances and expectations, but so does a customised UI based on some
complicated mathematical analysis of the user.

Because all of these come together to form one coherent experience, Front-End
Developers don't simply copy and paste code. We have to rationalise every
decision, and ultimately consider the performance tradeoffs and ease of reuse
and refactor as inputs into an algorithm that generates joy and delight. 

## 5. Everything will be Nothing
Despite all of this, most of the examples I gave above are beginning to fade
into history as relics of ancient wisdom. Our teams at LinkedIn are moving their
apps to using NPM for dependency management, productionalising our code using a
Broccoli pipeline and serving it up as Webpacks. Our recently re-launched mobile
web experience, Voyager, was written in ES6 on Ember.js and transpiled using
Babel. 

Front-End Development is a wild and scary rodeo. Because it appears easy, the
barriers to entry are very low, and a large number of individuals at different
experience levels contribute to an ever growing shared and shareable codebase.
Static analyses can only provide so much guidance, and best practices have only
begun permeating our ecosystem; but go ask your Front-End Dev to compare React,
Ember and Angular. Our tools are getting better, but they're also turning over
at an exponential rate. 

It's easy to think web development is easy, and the proverbial nephew developing
a massive e-commerce website in his basement hasn't yet left the front door. But
mistake you not--web development is a true profession and requires skill,
knowledge and experience to be good at. So the next time you develop some web,
ask yourself if you're considering the appropriate tradeoffs, if you're doing so
for the user, and if you feel a little anxious inside. If your answers to all
three are a resounding Yes, then welcome to the trenches as we defend the
Frontest End.
