My favorite subject of inquiry is **interfaces**. Ever since I watched [Captain
Janeway](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Star_Trek:_Voyager) instantiate a cup of
coffee with her voice, I've been obsessed with how we interact with computers
and other people.

Everything we do as human beings is mediated through some type of interface.

Ideas are communicated through the interface of language, and every door, button
and symbol is an interface--whether digital or physical--between two otherwise
independent systems. Interfaces tell us what we can and cannot do, but they're
often lossy representations of what goes on behind the scenes.

Every day, we evolve and adapt our mental models of how the world works by
poking and prodding the interfaces that exist all around us.

This mental model is the **context** with which we understand our lived
experiences. It frequently bewilders me that even though no two people have
exactly the same context, we've built entire civilisations across time and space
by designing functional and beautiful interfaces. 

> Everyone knows that Context is King, but nobody can actually say what kind of
> crown Context wears.

My academic and professional projects so far, have been to tease apart the
interfaces of context, through language, semiotics and, more recently, in
human-computer interaction, where I've been building digital tools to help
knowledge workers gain confidence through context.

I'm currently a Product Engineer at [Maihem](https://maihem.ai), carving out the
interface between the probabilistic nature of AI models and the demand for
rigour of AI-powered systems.

I grew up in Singapore, where I started this exploration through linguistics.
Finishing my degree in Cognitive Science in Providence, Rhode Island, I then
moved to the San Francisco Bay Area, then New York City, and currently call
London home.

Welcome aboard my context spaceship, let's see what interfaces we bump into
along the way. ðŸ›¸
